This episode is brought to you by Squarespace start building your website today. If you want
to websites go to squarespace dot com You can decide to look professionally designed regardless of whether or
not you are professional designer you can use their intuitive an easy to use tools Squarespace a state of the art
technology to ensure your site's security and stability is trusted by millions of
people and some of the most respected brands in the world how much does this all cost you ask.
That's just eight dollars a month and you get a freedom again if you sign up for your start your free trial today with
no credit card required at squarespace dot com When you sign up for Squarespace make sure to use
the offer code startup to get ten percent off your first purchase Squarespace
that beautiful.
Hey hey have you gone crazy yet are you done.
I'm calling to say that we can open the show
together and I want to know how your vacation is going. I'm sitting in
your little cottage for that three year old daughter in my left
its mark and he said I
say.
So if you are sitting with your children.
You might want to consider who's going to listen because there are some explicit
language from gimlet You're
listening to start up the podcast about what it's really like to start a business. I'm Lisa Chow.
Alex Bloomberg is on vacation this week and this is episode nine the
penalty to the season. Traditionally the episode where stuff starts getting really down
to the wire and things get as bad as these ever been so we're going to
follow that tradition and start with this an email or an typed up late one Friday
night in Feb twenty fifth
teen diorama I've been debating sending this email tonight because I
know email isn't the best medium for these kinds of
thoughts but I'm sort of freaking out. So here goes. We're going
to run out of money. We have twenty one thousand and our account. And are about to run payroll
of twelve thousand will probably make another five to ten thousand this month which
means the horn talks about a lot of things in this email how despite all the
improvements they've made in their service they're still not attracting more
users how the odds of getting a big investment a V.C. money seem smaller and
smaller and how she's run out of ideas. OK Well I'm sorry for
this email and where companies
that. I believe in are a founders and in our team.
But it's just hard right now to believe in our
business today on the show
how dating ring got to this point to a place where things were so bad the company was
a sensually on the verge of bankruptcy and how this little e-mail led
the day during founders to a big decision moment that changed the course
of
their company.
Dating rings money problems really started a couple months
back after the relaunch of the business in October twenty fourth
and we talked about that moment in a previous episode. Initially it seemed that the
relaunch would be a success that new customers would show up in droves. But
after an initial bump the number of new customers slowed to a
trickle one of the matchmaker surely. Noticed what was going on simply by
looking at the number of matches should be assigned to make each
week right after the launch she'd had two
hundred and then with every week your section would go down a little bit
and then a little bit more and then a little bit more but then when you get down to
like forty matches in your queue for the week it's
the startling
difference to never OK So I'm curious you never started looking for a job. I
never started looking for a job I mean I'm going to tell you everyone told me to look for a job and everyone like you are
nuts because I'd be like maybe like Harry. Has your company didn't
like to terrible like Mighty Mike amazing real bad you know
like no. No new members come in it seems like we're really
like getting down
there around this time they got some more bad news. Craig
Lauren's boyfriend and dating ring's only engineer had decided to leave the
company he was underpaid and the company just couldn't afford to give him the salary he could be
making somewhere else and this was huge you can't run a tech company without
any tech people but when I asked Lauren about this. She tried to play it off like it was no big deal.
I figured it was best and if you get a job that can pay more money and where he could
have friends to family guy in our company and he would just sit working in the bedroom all day.
So I was sad.
So OK so so so the idea is he's going to be full to full time for a couple more
months and then he's going to transition part time and take a full time job elsewhere.
Yes And then also help us five months. Once we have enough
money if I ever choose to be fulltime You can hear the doubt and more and force.
For weeks. I watched Lauren Emma do this awkward dance.
They were trying to put on a good face for the outside world and then behind the scenes they were
packing bailing water out of their sinking ship of a company trying to fix all these
problems in February twenty fifth teen four months after the relaunch
with revenue flat and users flat and almost no money in the bank.
Lauren flew to California to go to a networking event. She was there looking for potential
investors and also some advice answers.
She didn't know what more she could do and at this event she ran into one of her old advisors from Y.
Combinator Kevin
Hale Lorne recorded this audio diary on the train after meeting with
him he is out now thanks for telling him I was like you
know take the not so great average film so
great but I still work out. I came so close to
your frying pan as it were came to him and I
really just wanted to
ask like he would leave enough. Are we is this what it looks
like when I'm failing and about
dieting and basically he says
like you're in conference mode and cockroaches dumb a good term unless he is
like people to rush to die and work hard and are
scrappy but he is like you know the company only dies when you give
us an order but like you for that kind of
stuff they
can
but it's like giving up because mom pay your bills and you don't want to farm of
money in a car
and it feels like we have a little so they can use a
place a really great beginning of
a story or a correlation.
Everything is gone wrong and there's ten thousand left in the bank and
magically this house that's
really what I
don't like I think we're just going to run out of
nothing like most people still get most don't compass like
a
logical time when they're right under the law there and get the
same for our money like
gravity and it was
on this trip to California that worn route that Milt and. That we heard at the top of
the show so
there are ways of being a stable company are raising money or having
any engineers working for a number that made roll in April we probably won't.
And
money when Lauren go back to New York things had
gotten even worse. Lauren and Emma decided they couldn't afford to pay themselves anymore.
They stopped taking. Salaries and started looking for other jobs to help pay their bills and get them
through this tough time morn told my producer Lisa Pollak that she even reached out to an
old
employer one she had had when she was in
college I sat my computer and emailed my former tutoring
boss to see if there were any jobs I could take on and I had left
this company I was with them maybe six years five or six years a subring Company
A and I laughed. Because I was like oh like I'm going to fight how many there are going to you know
the S. to have C.E.O. It definitely was swollen
pride being back to where I was
before
for months at Y.C. and afterwards had been drilled into more and you can
do that you made it into an extremely exclusive club of startups
founders and your job is to grow your company to extraordinary heights.
It's a total slog. And it may take a while but this is a start
up life but Lauren was starting to
wonder if this was life she really wanted. She
was tired of working around the clock tired of being scared desperate and getting
rejected over and
over again publicly
failing shutting down the CO It seemed like that's where things were going
but there was one other option one other way to turn dating ring around
it was an
easy decision a decision mornin Emma would never have imagined when they packed their
bags for Y. Combinator over a year
ago becoming up. We find out what that last resort and why
it's at the heart of a big debate that's coming up after this word from our
sponsors
start at the spa. Answered by Ford Motor Company where acoustic engineers spent more than one hundred
hours to name the Explorer platinum audio system.
You do adjustments inside the vehicle then you listen then you come
out you come back you listen again you do more adjustments come back
out and it's continuous until it's the best acoustics
that you're going to get inside of that vehicle.
Djoko Saudi's audio system supervisor at Ford the goal to reproduce the sound
quality of concert halls in Amsterdam Berlin
Vienna Julius team will sit in the car and listen to every possible kind of music
his favorite is classic rock but there are other genres. I won't name names that
he hates but listens to. Anyway.
Yes So when we are doing the evaluations and listening to
the range of the ball human novel title we want to
match you will. Wow Do you have to listen to music that you don't like
at maximum
volume
absolutely do you go home with a headache
forward turning your car into a concert hall.
That is also sponsored by audible with over one hundred eighty thousand audiobook titles. I
talked with audible subscribers Matthew and J.C. Abbot from Amarillo Texas when they're dating.
Matthew was living in Austin and had to make long drives to see J.C. one of the drives
he
discovered it was like a late night trip and I needed to stay awake for the seven and a
half hours so I use this credit. And got it. Neil Gaiman's
book you know nice scary fantasy read by the author to keep
me
awake all night as I me that drive the SO would you say
that audible kept you alive to some
degree yet
audible saving lives one audiobook at a time go to audible dot com
slash start up and find something for yourself in whatever genre with a free trial and a free book.
Welcome
back to start up. I'm Lisa Cho and we left off more than Emma were in a
bad place and they realized they had one more option for saving their
company they could essentially give up on the dream that had led them to start the company in the
first place the dream the first pitched from the stage at Y. Combinator.
Didn't work. Like Wilbur I was
stating it. There is going to be a
billion dollar company that provides. On the mandate and dating right is going to
be that company. Thank
you at the time Lauren made this pitch from the stage at
Y.C. she and Emma were all in on the Mark Zuckerberg sweepstakes that
they were just building a company they were building a revolutionary company that had
the potential to append the status quo and get massive in the
process but now roughly one year later they were at a spot where the
only way to survive would be to give up that dream and become what's known in
the startup world as a lifestyle company. This idea of a
lifestyle company came up in season one of
startup and I'm going to replay that for you this is Alex talking with one of
gimlets investors.
Chris aka what exactly is a lifestyle business.
What
do you not rowing early to really.
Draw a reasonable salary.
A lifestyle business looks pretty good to a lot of people.
See this is why I'm stressed out talking to
you in ministers like Chris aka. Who put money into companies like
her and Twitter and Facebook. They want to see big growth and in
Chris soccer's world lifestyle companies are not exciting and they're not exciting
for investors that Y. Combinator either.
In fact the conventional wisdom at Y.C. is that to be a startup you can't by
definition be a lifestyle company. Here's Lauren talking to my producer Lisa Pollock.
If you had gone to Y.C. and talked at Y.C. about how I
don't know maybe this is going to be a lifestyle
business. What would the people around you have
said I think they would have said why are you here. Cole.
But like why are you why see. I mean I think the feeling would be that you're not cut out
for the big
leagues and that you're not as ambitious.
I mean I mean I think you have a lot of people who did run successful leftfield companies and now they're at the next level
like being at the Olympics and people talking about. You know doing
well
unlike their club or plea. You don't talk
about that you're the one
fix
your job. The startup world you're looking to run the hyper growth
company that are so magical that people are willing to hope to have a million.
I mean and the raising a billion
dollars and they're deciding this new future. So people
get really caught up in that. And that's the new game
that's the new That's the sexy thing to do and
something everyone thinks that lifestyle businesses are shitty It's just not in the game.
You're either in the game or you're not in the game and over the last year they'd
realize that maybe taking dating ring out of the game would be the best way to build
their
business and so week after Lauren sent that email she read at the beginning of the show.
A conversation over Skype about what they should do next. Lauren at the time was
in California about to pitch a potential investor the pitch about how dating
was poised to become a massive game changing company.
Emma was in New York about to get on a plane to go out and join more and they talked for
a while about what they need to say in this pitch and how far it felt from
reality and they arrived at a pivotal decision they recorded the
call. How much more we are going
to get fast like. We are going
to you know I think I think I should cancel meetings.
Do you
really
say you know we think we're going to be like obviously you feel weird
about taking your time or your money in
that I don't miss working on a
job to me like a minute. OK OK.
They were supposed to pitch this investor name call and the very next day. Lauren finished typing and read the
email aloud to
Emma I
had high call and then apologize for a last minute
notice but I unfortunately have to camp fire meeting to
say after much thought and a careful review of Q one financials we have
decided not to continue fundraising after eighteen months iterating. We still
have not found product markets and Eudora current financial status we can no longer afford
to keep our C.T.O. on full
time our clear path to Rick profitability is by focusing solely on
a premium matchmaking that is going to our main goal moving
forward as such we do not feel that it would make sense for us to continue fundraising while we do not have a
clear path toward scalable and sustainable growth.
I
feel
like
I
know
taken
I
spoke
to
them
a
couple
days
after
the
meet
call
we had like officially decided Saturday night I was really down because we had like sort of officially tired of it all I'm not trying to California like we're not going to fish about like this whole thing is sort of over you know it's like if you apply a college and you know it's your reach and you know like you're probably not going to get it and be like some sort of picture help going there like what and I can't bend them like. You know in the new That's third action letter and you're like no I'm not going to say goodbye to all those like fantasies you've had and all the dreams you've had about it even if you like sort of knew it was a long shot. You have to give up that dream in your head what. What did that fantasy look like if you could kind of give me a sense of like what did success kind of look like under that scenario. You know if it looked like telling people the name of. My company and having them know what it was. Having it be something that that that impacted people in some way why.
So what do you think success looks like under this new scenario
as a lifestyle business.
I
well what I'm going to say to make it sound like I didn't think this about the other but I guess I guess that
wasn't part of the image but now it feel like doing a good job being a good
matchmaker
and making enough money to not worry about making
payroll and pay myself.
Silly I think is what it looks like.
It felt like the right decision but of course it wasn't easy giving up the idea of being a
huge tech company. It was the idea that carried them through I see the thing be pitched
on demo
day and in all those investor meetings and giving it up was sort of
like giving up their identity. Lorne was demoralized and
when founders are going through tough
times family members are often the ones who bear the brunt of the ups and
downs be it emotionally or financially Lauren's parents for example
had invested thousands of dollars in dating ring.
It also lent Lauren money to help her get through times when she wasn't taking a salary but she didn't feel
like she could tell them what was really going on with the
business admitting failure to investors or advisors was one thing telling your mom.
That's
another I remember the beginning telling her I was like I'm going to make a company worth ten million
dollars and.
I was used to doing what I told them I would do like I'm
gonna go to a good college and I'm going
to do well in classes. And I just I
felt like I had failed and. I
guess it and mainly
most and barest when it came to my parents.
It seemed like I was admitting
this this huge failures that they'd had they hadn't seen
coming as far as Lauren's mom knew. Lauren was still trying to build a
giant dating company and from the outside it seemed like things were going well dating ring had been in
the York Times. On into I.C. they were chosen to be featured on this pod
cast and so when Lauren asked to borrow money. Her mom just thought of it as a way to help.
Lauren get through the tough times that all start to go through and Lauren thought she'd be able to pay the money
back but as the business struggled to pay her mom became more difficult.
Warren felt like she'd broken a
promise she didn't know how to tell her mom the truth about what was going on with the
business but then one day around the time Lauren and Emma made the decision to become a
lifestyle company. Lauren was home visiting her mom and they got into it. Lauren switched
on the
recorder what reasoning. So that
he can you a question about the different beach running
a final
and more not she knew where the conversation was going she expected her mom to ask about
money or say she was disappointed or tell Warren to get a real job
but instead learn her thing she never heard from her mom
before and you think oh no we are not the way that we plan
on it you know the rest.
You know I think that story out
of all I was always a great speaker and that and always happy where I
was you know I admire you are
willing to try
to apply for staying on
the field but even things don't always the way I'd
like but I'm still proud
of
the storyboarding to yeah.
I guess for some people a bit like of course your mom simulate Oh you're great everything's going
well. But your mom's not that way.
Not in a bad way but
she she's not like overly It's not like every week she calls me and tells me I'm
the best person ever like I know but like sheerly has a mom like
that.
You know my mom my mom's more reserved. I would
say snow. So this this
monologue and I really took it to heart.
So
once
you've made this momentous decision. Switching from the number of data to a simple
matchmaking service. One of the first steps is to announce it to your staff on a
Monday morning. Emma another matchmaker sitting in the New York office.
Lauren and the other staff members were on Skype. They had gotten them all together to
tell them we're a new company now here's an
A and we know that we have the team we know we have the resources we know what we're good and we know that we can
be something really great and so the next few months are really going to be
spent transitioning the company to being a
really strong matchmaking service which which we can be and and we
are definitely have at least halfway there.
Coming
up on THE NEXT EPISODE. What that other half looks like and what it's like to be
a lifestyle company. Plus we talk about something that's been looming over the entire season.
What happens if your business when you're in deep with pod
cast producers like us was seen from the upcoming episode in a minute
after these words from our
sponsors.
This
episode of startup is sponsored by audible with over one hundred eighty thousand audio books and spoken word products to
choose from business titles fiction mysteries trailers and lots more audible has a
great listen guarantee so you can exchange any book you aren't happy with for another title any time.
No questions
asked for a free audio book and a thirty day free trial go to audible dot com
slash this season of startup is sponsored by Ford Motor Company.
We're speaking about experiment that changed the way the world moves get in on the conversation at
Ford dot com slash start
up and special thanks to male chimp start up of its own
begun as a side project in two thousand and one. Now they said more than six hundred million Mills
a day. Melchior it's been with him since the
beginning. Coming
up on the next episode of start up what happens to your company when you're the subject of the
startup pod cast.
OK so it's a tricky month
commitment right. So I have been listening to the podcast and the last
episode that aired.
There were some talk about financial things and how much runway was left and it was only maybe like
a month if I remember correctly.
Are you certain that if you pay for a three month number shit in one month we will no longer exist.
Based on what
I can cast that unrealistic.
That's coming up on THE NEXT EPISODE OF start this episode
was reported edited in for use by Lisa Pollack in Caitlin Roberts We also got editing
help from Caitlin
Kenney the start of Web site was designed in partnership with us let express Mark Phillips wrote and
performed our theme song build buildings room perform for special music. The Reverend
John De Lorean
Ixia season two a start it features brand. You original music
written performed by our very own John De Lorean along with his band mates towards canal
a Sam Americas song of Gregor John the dough. Dominic Saul Caro.
Their band. Is Hot Mama Stocco to subscribe to the podcast go to i Tunes
and subscribe to start
up or check out the gimlet media website gimlet Media dot com You can follow us on
Twitter at pod cast
artist or mean at least the new
trial. I'm Lisa Chow on the next episode of
Star.